1938, Nazi Germany. As the dust settles in the aftermath of the Kristallnacht pogrom,
a train of child refugees approaches the Dutch border. Evelyn Kay, a young Jewish girl from
Vienna, sits nervously on board.
When the announcement happened, everyone made a noise. They'd stopped the train and turned us off the train.
And then the Gestapo got on at the border, and they said if we had any gold, we had to give it to the Gestapo,
otherwise they'd tear us off the train. And I had this lovely signet ring and the bracelets, which I didn't know where,
and I put it into the seat of the train, and it had disappeared. I could never find it again.
In July 1939, another child refugee, Renata Collins, arrives in London from Prague.
When I got to Liverpool Street Station, my foster father, he was there waiting for me, and he was a Baptist minister.
He had a black hat, black suit, black coat, and of course a minister's collar.
And they just took me up to him, I caught hold of his hand, and I went with him.
I can't imagine how a child nowadays would go, but he just smiled at me and off we went.
By the middle of 1939, it was clear to many Jews in Central Europe that they were no longer safe in their own homes and workplaces.
The annexation of Austria and Czechoslovakia, alongside a vicious pogrom in November 1938, prompted many Jews to flee the German Reich.
This was no easy task, since few countries around the world were willing to accept them.
Some, however, managed to escape to Britain and to Wales.
I'm Maurice Brodie, historian at Aberystwyth University.
In this second episode of The Holocaust and Wales, we look at the perilous journeys taken by refugees to get to Wales.
How did they leave Central Europe? What barriers did they face? And how was their journey into the unknown?
For Klaus Ascher, later Colin Anson, who lived in Aberdove in Gwinev during the war, the spark for leaving was a tragic one.
His father had been murdered by the Nazis in Dachau concentration camp in 1937 for speaking out against the regime.
Making the decision to flee was just one of many challenges facing potential refugees.
After my father was killed, it became obvious that there wouldn't be much of a future for me.
And all manner of avenues were explored for integrating here, there and everywhere.
There was an uncle of my half-sister, and this uncle was going to Cuba and we were trying to get the necessary documentation.
It was a scramble by all sorts of people, mostly Jewish people, trying to get out of the country in circumstances when it was being made very difficult to get out.
And there was an enormous weight of red tape and many obstacles to overcome.
Some refugees had family in Britain who could help them escape.
Laura Confino, who was eventually evacuated to Wales, was living in Frankfurt in 1938.
And my father then phoned our family in England.
And he phoned them up and he said, look here, you must help her to get Laura to help to come to you, because it would be either now or never.
And so they managed to get all the papers together.
And I remember in Frankfurt itself, I mean, there were long queues of Jews all needing to have their papers stamped and everything got ready for them to leave.
And there was a lot of fear and nervousness.
And I remember the queues and you had to stand and wait.
And then it was all very, very stressful.
And eventually I got permission to leave.
The main problem for refugees was to find a country that would let them in.
For hundreds of thousands of potential refugees, the door to safety was firmly shut.
In Britain, one of the few ways to get a visa was to find a job as a domestic servant, like a housekeeper.
Fanny Höchstetter from Loutheim in Germany managed to escape after her sister, Bertil, got her a job as a domestic servant in the Wirral, where she had managed to flee herself.
Fanny then moved to Llangollen.
Bertil first tried to get a visa for the US with the help of a famous relative, Carl Lemle, living in California.
Here's Ernie Hunter, Fanny's son.
And Bertil wrote to him and almost by return post, she got a one million dollar affidavit from Carl Lemle, a guarantee that she would not be a burden on the American state.
Bertil went to the consulate, the American consulate in Stuttgart, with this document which you had to hand in.
She got a number and Bertil realized the number was going to take two or more years to get to because there were annual quotas in addition to the entry requirements.
And she didn't think she's going to last that long.
So she placed an advert in the Times for a domestic job because that's the only work women were allowed to do in the UK to get in.
And a Mr. Pritik from Heswell in the Wirral took her on as a housekeeper.
Another route for refugees to Britain was to find work as an agricultural labourer.
Like domestic servants, the British government deemed farm workers to be in short supply during the 1930s.
For Herman Rothman, who later worked on farms near Abergalla in north Wales, gaining experience in agricultural work as well as fleeing Germany was a bonus.
Herman's family intended to send him to a hachshara, a Jewish training camp to prepare young people for life on a kibbutz, a type of agricultural planned community in what was then the British Mandate of Palestine.
My parents thought it is a good idea if I would leave and possibly also my brother.
And arrangements were made to apply for to be taken either to Israel or anywhere else because they were advised by their German non-Jewish friends that there is no hope for you at all here.
There is nothing here, nothing left. Take and go.
They then arranged for me to go on for preparation for emigration to Palestine.
But they said you go first to England where you will be trained in agricultural work so that you could have a useful profession when you go to Palestine in those days.
Herman, who was 14 at the time, benefited from a policy which allowed unaccompanied child refugees to come to Britain without a visa, provided they were sponsored by friends, family or other charitable organisations.
This became known as the Kinder Transport, Children's Transport.
Ten thousand children were able to come to the UK under this scheme.
Colin Anson was one of them.
It eventually became possible through sponsorship of the Quakers, of the Society of Friends, to get me attached to a Children's Transport on the basis of a temporary transit visa to Britain,
which in turn was founded on the fact that I had applied for immigration into the United States, who would accept the application and give you a waiting number because they would accept immigrants but only a certain quota.
The British government was willing to accept refugee children but did not organise the transports themselves.
This was the task of the Refugee Children's Movement, an umbrella organisation in the UK as well as organisations in Europe.
It was mainly Jewish associations such as the Central British Fund for German Jewry which funded the transports, but some children were supported by non-Jewish groups like the Quakers.
£50 was needed for each child's upkeep, around £4,000 in today's money.
B. Green, who was later evacuated to Wales, came to Britain through the help of a well-known Anglo-Jewish liberal family.
In my case, some friends, in fact I think some distant relatives from Munich, came to Sevenoaks where they met up, I think with a member of the Waley Cohen family who were then, had been liberals, active liberals.
And this Waley Cohen woman, being a liberal, was acquainted with a Mrs Williams who was one of the leading lights, an old lady by then, who had already agreed to take a girl from Hamburg.
And whether she had second thoughts about having one child, and that perhaps it might be better to have two, or whether she was persuaded by Mrs Waley Cohen, who had spoken to these distant relatives of ours, saying, you know, this is a nice girl, whatever she said, she agreed to my coming to her house provided the £50 were found.
The parents of five-year-old Renata Collins from Prague had agreed for her to stay with a couple in Porth, South Wales.
I knew where I was coming to in Wales, because if you were under seven, you had to have a home to go to. And I'd got pictures, which I've still got, of where I was going, the people, the husband and wife and the father, grandfather.
And they had pictures of me. And I've got letters here that I wrote, went back and forth. And I particularly said, obviously my mother typed the letter, that I hope there was no spinach in England.
But if there was plenty of ice cream, I would probably be a very good girl. So I don't know how good I was, because there wasn't much ice cream during the war.
The last main route through which refugees gained permission to enter Britain was for industrialists who agreed to open factories in pockets of high unemployment, known as special areas.
One of these special areas was at Treforest, near Pontypriddh. Des Goulton, son of a factory owner and by then living in Prague, remembers the procedure.
So, and then in 1939, there came a mission to Prague from this country, and the mission was sponsored by the Board of Trade.
And the purpose of the mission was to invite industrialists to come to this country, particularly to South Wales, to start a factory to employ people.
So in August 1939, we came to this country.
For those refugees who managed to get permission to leave, there were a number of restrictions.
The Nazis were pleased to see Jews leave Germany, but only if they left their assets behind.
The government imposed a flight tax on emigration, effectively stealing the savings and property of those leaving the country.
For many, leaving the Reich meant starting a new life almost from scratch.
Children on the Kindertransport were only allowed to bring with them one suitcase and a small amount of money, ten Reichsmarks.
Bea Green's mother helped her pack.
So she packed, I know this sounds very funny now, but she packed my dowry in the sack.
So I had initialed sheets and blankets and either gowns, you know, with either no duck or goose feathers or whatever, all in this sack.
This was my dowry from when I got married. I was 14 years old then.
But this is how my mother thought, you know, she had had a dowry, so her daughter must have a dowry.
Herman Rothman, a keen athlete, prioritised sporting prowess over practicality when he packed.
I was only permitted to take a case.
And my importance to me was that I had my spikes, my running shoes with me.
And anything appertaining to athletics had a priority before anything else.
But I had no winter coat and many other things I had to leave behind.
The most common way to leave the German Reich was by train, through the Netherlands and onward to Britain by boat.
For children on the Kindertransport, only one parent was permitted at the train station.
This was often the last time they ever saw them.
Julius Veil's class was evacuated from Cologne after their school was destroyed during the Kristallnacht pogrom.
His father had already been arrested, so his mother saw him off.
Yes, I can see it now. I can see us at the main station called the Hauptbahnhof in Cologne.
On a platform getting onto a train, I think it was about three o'clock in the afternoon.
And my mother was there, seeing me onto the train.
And it was a whole class which was then moving to England.
And I could say at this point that out of the family I'm the only one who remains.
Not today, but due to the Holocaust, where the rest of my family were victims of the Holocaust.
I was the only one who left Germany.
Renata Collins was assigned to a Kindertransport organised by Nicholas Winton,
a British bank worker whose efforts helped save over 600 children from Nazi-occupied Czechoslovakia.
Renata was ill when the time came for her train to leave Prague.
One of my mother's best friends was our doctor, and she was putting her daughter on.
Tanya was about 11 years older than me, so I had chickenpox and a temperature of 104.
And my mother really didn't want to put me on the train.
And the doctor said, well, if you don't put her on the train, she won't go.
Which is quite ironic because the next train of Sir Nicholas's, they were actually on the train and it was stopped.
Renata's Kindertransport was the last to get out of Czechoslovakia.
She never saw her parents again.
Even after leaving the station, while in Germany trains were still subject to searches and seizures by the Nazis.
The promised land for those travelling through Germany, at least initially, was the Dutch border.
For Colin Anson, it was a special moment.
Our Funtjer station was Emmerich, where everybody was ordered off the train.
And the SS Funtjer police had a last cruel game with us, saying that we wouldn't be allowed to go.
Scattering our luggage about and cutting off people's ties in case they had hidden foreign currency in it and that sort of thing.
And then with a laugh eventually letting us back onto the train.
And as the train pulled out, we all felt rather washed out.
And not very long afterwards, the compartment door was flung open and Mr. Blaschke called,
We are of Hollandish and Borden. We are on Dutch soil.
And I've never had such a traumatic emotional shock in my life.
Not even when my father died because we were under such pressure.
One accepted that one expected the worst at all times.
And to have lived under such pressure and grown quite accustomed to it for so long,
made one totally unprepared for the sudden explosive release of that pressure at the moment,
when we were told that we were no longer under it.
I thought I had faint. It was an amazing moment. I shall never forget it so long as I live.
Bea Green remembers the hospitality of the Dutch after crossing the German border.
When we finally left Germany and chug, chug, chugged into Holland, the train stopped again once we got into Holland.
And these wonderful Dutch women came on the train. They were all big and blonde, I think.
At least that's the impression I had.
And they were so nice to us. And it was such an extraordinary experience.
And they handed out orange juice and white bread and butter.
And you know, I don't think anything had tasted so absolutely marvellous
as that orange juice and that white bread and butter.
The final stage of the journey was usually by ship to a coastal town and then a train to London.
Des Goulton left mainland Europe at the hook of Holland.
We boarded the ship and we went to Harwich.
And on the ship there were little children, English children, who spoke English perfectly.
And I was wondering how it's possible that such little children could speak English so well
whereas I couldn't speak a word of English.
I remember I came to this country with great pleasure and great anticipation.
And I was expecting that I would come to this country and it would be nothing but rain all the day.
But fortunately the weather was very good.
In Britain, refugees were now safe from the Nazi's clutches,
even if many had been forced to leave their families behind in Europe.
In the next episode, we discover how refugees adapted to their new lives in Wales,
how the local community welcomed them, and how their status changed as the war progressed.
Until next time, thanks for listening.